README.md, before:

[![License GPL 2](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL_2-green.svg)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt)
[![MELPA](https://melpa.org/packages/ejc-sql-badge.svg)](https://melpa.org/#/ejc-sql)
[![Build Status](https://api.travis-ci.org/kostafey/ejc-sql.svg?branch=new-cache)](https://travis-ci.org/kostafey/ejc-sql#)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/kostafey/ejc-sql/badge.svg?branch=new-cache)](https://coveralls.io/github/kostafey/ejc-sql?branch=new-cache)

# ejc-sql

ejc-sql turns Emacs into simple SQL client, it uses JDBC connection to
databases via [clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) lib.

You can use multiple connections at the same time. Autocompletion and basic
SQL scripts formatting are also available.

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Install JDBC](#install-jdbc)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Autocomplete](#autocomplete)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [License](#license)

## Installation

1. To run Clojure install [Leiningen](http://leiningen.org).

2. Install CIDER middleware [CIDER nREPL](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider-nrepl).

   Quick hint to install [CIDER nREPL](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider-nrepl)
   if you are not Clojure developer (yet):

   Create `~/.lein/profiles.clj` and add the following contents to it:

   ```clojure
   {:user {:plugins [[cider/cider-nrepl "0.12.0"]]}}
   ```

3. Add MELPA (if not yet) to your package-archives list:

   ```lisp
   (require 'package)
   (add-to-list 'package-archives
                '("melpa" . "http://melpa.milkbox.net/packages/"))
   (package-initialize)
   ```

   Then you can install ejc-sql with the following command:

   <kbd>M-x package-install [RET] ejc-sql [RET]</kbd>

## Install JDBC

If you are familiar with JDBC, please omit this section.

The most common way is to install JDBC drivers to your `~/.m2` directory.
Here is a list of such installation examples. Anyway __it will become outdated
soon__, so please consult Google to install your database JDBC driver.

First of all install [maven](https://maven.apache.org/), then you can install
your JDBC driver with one of the following commands.

**Oracle**

Download JDBC driver manually from
[oracle.com](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/features/jdbc/index-091264.html)

Fix your actual JDBC version number `-Dversion`, filepath `-Dfile` and run
command like this:
```
mvn install:install-file -Dfile="~/downloads/ojdbc7.jar" -DgroupId=com.oracle.jdbc -DartifactId=ojdbc7 -Dversion=12.1.0.2 -Dpackaging=jar -DgeneratePom=true
```

**MS SQL Server**

Download JDBC driver manually from
[microsoft.com](https://social.msdn.microsoft.com/search/en-US?query=sql%20server%20jdbc)

Fix your actual JDBC version number `-Dversion`, filepath `-Dfile` and run
command like this:
```
mvn install:install-file -Dfile="~/downloads/sqljdbc.jar" -DgroupId=com.microsoft.sqlserver  -DartifactId=sqljdbc -Dversion=6.0 -Dpackaging=jar -DgeneratePom=true
```

**JTDS**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=net.sourceforge.jtds:jtds:1.3.1```

**PostgreSQL**
```
mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=postgresql:postgresql:9.3-1102.jdbc41 -DrepoUrl=http://clojars.org/repo/
```

**MySQL**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=mysql:mysql-connector-java:5.1.6```

**MariaDB**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=org.mariadb.jdbc:mariadb-java-client:1.1.7```

**H2**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=com.h2database:h2:1.4.192```

**SQLite**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=org.xerial:sqlite-jdbc:3.8.11.2```

## Configuration

Setup connections with `ejc-create-connection` function in your `.emacs`.
It's first arg is your custom database connection name, the rest args
are the same as database connection structure of
[clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) lib.

The configuration of ejs-sql might looks like this:

```lisp
;; Create your jdbc database connections configuration:

;; MySQL example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MySQL-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/mysql/mysql-connector-java/5.1.6/"
                    "mysql-connector-java-5.1.6.jar")
 :classname "com.mysql.jdbc.Driver"
 :subprotocol "mysql"
 :subname "//localhost:3306/my_db_name"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret")

;; MS SQL Server example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/microsoft"
                    "/sqlserver/sqljdbc/4.2/sqljdbc-4.2.jar")
 :classname "com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"
 :subprotocol "sqlserver"
 :subname "//localhost:1433"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret"
 :database "my_db_name")

;; MS SQL Server via :connection-uri example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection-uri"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/microsoft"
                    "/sqlserver/sqljdbc/4.2/sqljdbc-4.2.jar")
 :classname "com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"
 :connection-uri (concat "jdbc:sqlserver://localhost\\\\instance:1433;"
                         "databaseName=my_db_name;"
                         "user=a_user;"
                         "password=secret;"))

;; MS SQL Server via JTDS example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection-JTDS"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/net/sourceforge/jtds"
                    "/jtds/1.3.1/jtds-1.3.1.jar")
 :classname "net.sourceforge.jtds.jdbc.Driver"
 :connection-uri (concat "jdbc:jtds:sqlserver://localhost:1433/dbname;"
                         "instance=instance;"
                         "user=a_user;"
                         "password=secret;"))

;; Oracle example
(ejc-create-connection
 "Oracle-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/oracle/jdbc"
                    "/ojdbc7/12.1.0.2/ojdbc7-12.1.0.2.jar")
 :classname "oracle.jdbc.driver.OracleDriver"
 :subprotocol "oracle"
 :subname "thin:@localhost:1521:my_db_name"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret"
 :separator "/")

;; H2 example
(ejc-create-connection
 "H2-db-connection"
 :classpath "~/.m2/repository/com/h2database/h2/1.4.191/h2-1.4.191.jar"
 :classname "org.h2.Driver"
 :subprotocol "h2"
 :subname "file://~/projects/my_proj/db/database;AUTO_SERVER=TRUE"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret")
```

## Usage

First of all, open your SQL buffer file (or any temporary buffer) and connect
to database

`M-x ejc-connect <RET> MySQL-db-connection <RET>`.

and wait until "Connected." message appears.
Since connection information is buffer-local you should use `ejc-connect`
for any new buffer. There is handy function to create temporary buffer for
playing with SQL: `ejc-switch-to-sql-editor-buffer`.

Then type

```SQL
select <something> from <mytable>
```
and press <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd> to run it. Use `\` char to separate expressions to
eval. It's possible to run multiple statements, you can use `;` to separate it.

Have a much fun!

## List of keybindings & functions

New keybindings defined in `ejc-sql-mode` minor mode:

 Keyboard shortcut             | Command                         | Description
-------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------
 <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd>            | `ejc-eval-user-sql-at-point`    | Evaluate SQL/JPQL script bounded by the `ejc-sql-separator` or/and buffer boundaries.
 <kbd>C-h t</kbd>              | `ejc-describe-table`            | Describe SQL table.
 <kbd>C-h T</kbd>              | `ejc-describe-entity`           | Describe SQL entity entity - function, procedure or type.
 <kbd>C-h up</kbd>             | `ejc-show-last-result`          | Show last result.
 <kbd>C-c t</kbd>              | `ejc-show-tables-list`          | Show tables list.
 <kbd>C-c T</kbd>              | `ejc-show-user-types-list`      | Show user types list.
 <kbd>C-c s</kbd>              | `ejc-strinp-sql-at-point`       | Strip SQL (trim java string tokens).
 <kbd>C-c S</kbd>              | `ejc-dress-sql-at-point`        | Dress SQL (to copy-paste it to java code).
 <kbd>C-c p</kbd>              | `ejc-pretty-print-sql-at-point` | Pretty-print this SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-s-&lt;up&gt;</kbd>     | `ejc-previous-sql`              | Goto previous SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-s-&lt;down&gt;</kbd>   | `ejc-next-sql`                  | Goto next SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-S-s-&lt;up&gt;</kbd>   | `ejc-previous-sql`              | Select from point to previous SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-S-s-&lt;down&gt;</kbd> | `ejc-next-sql`                  | Select from point to next SQL statement.

List of other interactive functions

 Command                            | Description
------------------------------------|------------------------------------------
 `ejc-connect`                      | Connect to database for current buffer
 `ejc-quit-connection`              | Close all database connections, quit Clojure REPL.
 `ejc-format-sql-at-point`          | Format SQL
 `ejc-pretty-print-sql-region`      | Pretty-print selected SQL snippet
 `ejc-mark-this-sql`                | Mark SQL script bounded by the `ejc-sql-separator` or/and buffer boundaries
 `ejc-show-tables-list`             | Show tables list
 `ejc-show-constraints-list`        | Show constraints list
 `ejc-show-procedures-list`         | Show procedures list
 `ejc-open-log`                     | Open log
 `ejc-switch-to-sql-editor-buffer`  | Create buffer with `ejc-sql-mode`
 `ejc-invalidate-cache`             | Clean your current connection cache (database owners and tables list)

## Autocomplete

Autocompletion is available for the following databases:

* Informix
* MySQL
* Oracle
* H2
* MS SQL Server

## Troubleshooting

```
Error running timer ‘ac-update-greedy’: (error "Sync nREPL request timed out (op eval session...
```

Increase `nrepl-sync-request-timeout`, e.g.:

```lisp
(setq nrepl-sync-request-timeout 60)
```

## Requirements:

* [GNU Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/emacs.html) 24.
* [Leiningen](http://leiningen.org) 2.x
* [clomacs](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/clomacs)
* [clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) 0.5.8
* [dash](https://github.com/magnars/dash.el)
* [auto-complete](https://github.com/auto-complete/auto-complete)
* [spinner.el](https://github.com/Malabarba/spinner.el)

## License

Copyright © 2012-2017 Kostafey <kostafey@gmail.com> and
[contributors](https://github.com/kostafey/ejc-sql/contributors)

Distributed under the General Public License 2.0+

Commit message:

Add limit for number of records to output customization.

README.md, after:

[![License GPL 2](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL_2-green.svg)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt)
[![MELPA](https://melpa.org/packages/ejc-sql-badge.svg)](https://melpa.org/#/ejc-sql)
[![Build Status](https://api.travis-ci.org/kostafey/ejc-sql.svg?branch=new-cache)](https://travis-ci.org/kostafey/ejc-sql#)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/kostafey/ejc-sql/badge.svg?branch=new-cache)](https://coveralls.io/github/kostafey/ejc-sql?branch=new-cache)

# ejc-sql

ejc-sql turns Emacs into simple SQL client, it uses JDBC connection to
databases via [clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) lib.

You can use multiple connections at the same time. Autocompletion and basic
SQL scripts formatting are also available.

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Install JDBC](#install-jdbc)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Autocomplete](#autocomplete)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [License](#license)

## Installation

1. To run Clojure install [Leiningen](http://leiningen.org).

2. Install CIDER middleware [CIDER nREPL](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider-nrepl).

   Quick hint to install [CIDER nREPL](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider-nrepl)
   if you are not Clojure developer (yet):

   Create `~/.lein/profiles.clj` and add the following contents to it:

   ```clojure
   {:user {:plugins [[cider/cider-nrepl "0.12.0"]]}}
   ```

3. Add MELPA (if not yet) to your package-archives list:

   ```lisp
   (require 'package)
   (add-to-list 'package-archives
                '("melpa" . "http://melpa.milkbox.net/packages/"))
   (package-initialize)
   ```

   Then you can install ejc-sql with the following command:

   <kbd>M-x package-install [RET] ejc-sql [RET]</kbd>

## Install JDBC

If you are familiar with JDBC, please omit this section.

The most common way is to install JDBC drivers to your `~/.m2` directory.
Here is a list of such installation examples. Anyway __it will become outdated
soon__, so please consult Google to install your database JDBC driver.

First of all install [maven](https://maven.apache.org/), then you can install
your JDBC driver with one of the following commands.

**Oracle**

Download JDBC driver manually from
[oracle.com](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/features/jdbc/index-091264.html)

Fix your actual JDBC version number `-Dversion`, filepath `-Dfile` and run
command like this:
```
mvn install:install-file -Dfile="~/downloads/ojdbc7.jar" -DgroupId=com.oracle.jdbc -DartifactId=ojdbc7 -Dversion=12.1.0.2 -Dpackaging=jar -DgeneratePom=true
```

**MS SQL Server**

Download JDBC driver manually from
[microsoft.com](https://social.msdn.microsoft.com/search/en-US?query=sql%20server%20jdbc)

Fix your actual JDBC version number `-Dversion`, filepath `-Dfile` and run
command like this:
```
mvn install:install-file -Dfile="~/downloads/sqljdbc.jar" -DgroupId=com.microsoft.sqlserver  -DartifactId=sqljdbc -Dversion=6.0 -Dpackaging=jar -DgeneratePom=true
```

**JTDS**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=net.sourceforge.jtds:jtds:1.3.1```

**PostgreSQL**
```
mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=postgresql:postgresql:9.3-1102.jdbc41 -DrepoUrl=http://clojars.org/repo/
```

**MySQL**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=mysql:mysql-connector-java:5.1.6```

**MariaDB**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=org.mariadb.jdbc:mariadb-java-client:1.1.7```

**H2**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=com.h2database:h2:1.4.192```

**SQLite**

```mvn org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-dependency-plugin:2.10:get -Dartifact=org.xerial:sqlite-jdbc:3.8.11.2```

## Configuration

Setup connections with `ejc-create-connection` function in your `.emacs`.
It's first arg is your custom database connection name, the rest args
are the same as database connection structure of
[clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) lib.

The configuration of ejs-sql might looks like this:

```lisp
;; Create your jdbc database connections configuration:

;; MySQL example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MySQL-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/mysql/mysql-connector-java/5.1.6/"
                    "mysql-connector-java-5.1.6.jar")
 :classname "com.mysql.jdbc.Driver"
 :subprotocol "mysql"
 :subname "//localhost:3306/my_db_name"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret")

;; MS SQL Server example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/microsoft"
                    "/sqlserver/sqljdbc/4.2/sqljdbc-4.2.jar")
 :classname "com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"
 :subprotocol "sqlserver"
 :subname "//localhost:1433"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret"
 :database "my_db_name")

;; MS SQL Server via :connection-uri example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection-uri"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/microsoft"
                    "/sqlserver/sqljdbc/4.2/sqljdbc-4.2.jar")
 :classname "com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"
 :connection-uri (concat "jdbc:sqlserver://localhost\\\\instance:1433;"
                         "databaseName=my_db_name;"
                         "user=a_user;"
                         "password=secret;"))

;; MS SQL Server via JTDS example
(ejc-create-connection
 "MS-SQL-db-connection-JTDS"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/net/sourceforge/jtds"
                    "/jtds/1.3.1/jtds-1.3.1.jar")
 :classname "net.sourceforge.jtds.jdbc.Driver"
 :connection-uri (concat "jdbc:jtds:sqlserver://localhost:1433/dbname;"
                         "instance=instance;"
                         "user=a_user;"
                         "password=secret;"))

;; Oracle example
(ejc-create-connection
 "Oracle-db-connection"
 :classpath (concat "~/.m2/repository/com/oracle/jdbc"
                    "/ojdbc7/12.1.0.2/ojdbc7-12.1.0.2.jar")
 :classname "oracle.jdbc.driver.OracleDriver"
 :subprotocol "oracle"
 :subname "thin:@localhost:1521:my_db_name"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret"
 :separator "/")

;; H2 example
(ejc-create-connection
 "H2-db-connection"
 :classpath "~/.m2/repository/com/h2database/h2/1.4.191/h2-1.4.191.jar"
 :classname "org.h2.Driver"
 :subprotocol "h2"
 :subname "file://~/projects/my_proj/db/database;AUTO_SERVER=TRUE"
 :user "a_user"
 :password "secret")
```

`ejc-set-rows-limit` set limit for number of records to output (1000 by
default). Set nil if you want to disable limit.

```lisp
(ejc-set-rows-limit 1000)
```

## Usage

First of all, open your SQL buffer file (or any temporary buffer) and connect
to database

`M-x ejc-connect <RET> MySQL-db-connection <RET>`.

and wait until "Connected." message appears.
Since connection information is buffer-local you should use `ejc-connect`
for any new buffer. There is handy function to create temporary buffer for
playing with SQL: `ejc-switch-to-sql-editor-buffer`.

Then type

```SQL
select <something> from <mytable>
```
and press <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd> to run it. Use `\` char to separate expressions to
eval. It's possible to run multiple statements, you can use `;` to separate it.

Have a much fun!

## List of keybindings & functions

New keybindings defined in `ejc-sql-mode` minor mode:

 Keyboard shortcut             | Command                         | Description
-------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------
 <kbd>C-c C-c</kbd>            | `ejc-eval-user-sql-at-point`    | Evaluate SQL/JPQL script bounded by the `ejc-sql-separator` or/and buffer boundaries.
 <kbd>C-h t</kbd>              | `ejc-describe-table`            | Describe SQL table.
 <kbd>C-h T</kbd>              | `ejc-describe-entity`           | Describe SQL entity entity - function, procedure or type.
 <kbd>C-h up</kbd>             | `ejc-show-last-result`          | Show last result.
 <kbd>C-c t</kbd>              | `ejc-show-tables-list`          | Show tables list.
 <kbd>C-c T</kbd>              | `ejc-show-user-types-list`      | Show user types list.
 <kbd>C-c s</kbd>              | `ejc-strinp-sql-at-point`       | Strip SQL (trim java string tokens).
 <kbd>C-c S</kbd>              | `ejc-dress-sql-at-point`        | Dress SQL (to copy-paste it to java code).
 <kbd>C-c p</kbd>              | `ejc-pretty-print-sql-at-point` | Pretty-print this SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-s-&lt;up&gt;</kbd>     | `ejc-previous-sql`              | Goto previous SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-s-&lt;down&gt;</kbd>   | `ejc-next-sql`                  | Goto next SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-S-s-&lt;up&gt;</kbd>   | `ejc-previous-sql`              | Select from point to previous SQL statement.
 <kbd>C-S-s-&lt;down&gt;</kbd> | `ejc-next-sql`                  | Select from point to next SQL statement.

List of other interactive functions

 Command                            | Description
------------------------------------|------------------------------------------
 `ejc-connect`                      | Connect to database for current buffer
 `ejc-quit-connection`              | Close all database connections, quit Clojure REPL.
 `ejc-format-sql-at-point`          | Format SQL
 `ejc-pretty-print-sql-region`      | Pretty-print selected SQL snippet
 `ejc-mark-this-sql`                | Mark SQL script bounded by the `ejc-sql-separator` or/and buffer boundaries
 `ejc-show-tables-list`             | Show tables list
 `ejc-show-constraints-list`        | Show constraints list
 `ejc-show-procedures-list`         | Show procedures list
 `ejc-open-log`                     | Open log
 `ejc-switch-to-sql-editor-buffer`  | Create buffer with `ejc-sql-mode`
 `ejc-invalidate-cache`             | Clean your current connection cache (database owners and tables list)

## Autocomplete

Autocompletion is available for the following databases:

* Informix
* MySQL
* Oracle
* H2
* MS SQL Server

## Troubleshooting

```
Error running timer ‘ac-update-greedy’: (error "Sync nREPL request timed out (op eval session...
```

Increase `nrepl-sync-request-timeout`, e.g.:

```lisp
(setq nrepl-sync-request-timeout 60)
```

## Requirements:

* [GNU Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/emacs.html) 24.
* [Leiningen](http://leiningen.org) 2.x
* [clomacs](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/clomacs)
* [clojure/java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc) 0.5.8
* [dash](https://github.com/magnars/dash.el)
* [auto-complete](https://github.com/auto-complete/auto-complete)
* [spinner.el](https://github.com/Malabarba/spinner.el)

## License

Copyright © 2012-2017 Kostafey <kostafey@gmail.com> and
[contributors](https://github.com/kostafey/ejc-sql/contributors)

Distributed under the General Public License 2.0+
